[Unknown]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: I
[Amit Varma]: take a shot at answering all these questions and many more.
[Amit Varma]: I aim to go beyond the scene and show you the unseen effects of public policy and private
[Amit Varma]: action.
[Amit Varma]: I speak to experts on economics, political philosophy, cognitive neuroscience, and constitutional
[Amit Varma]: law so that their insights can blow not only my mind, but also yours.
[Amit Varma]: The Scene and the Unseen releases every Monday, so do check out the archives and follow the
[Amit Varma]: show at sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: You can also subscribe to The Scene and the Unseen on whatever podcast app you happen
[Amit Varma]: to prefer.
[Amit Varma]: And now, let's move on to the show.
[Amit Varma]: The two great powers in the world today are the USA and China.
[Amit Varma]: And it's curious that although China is our neighbor, we know so much more about the USA.
[Amit Varma]: We are steeped in American culture.
[Amit Varma]: We sing their songs, we speak their language, not just English, but American English.
[Amit Varma]: And we know as much about their celebrities' love lives as if they were our celebrities.
[Amit Varma]: But we know next to nothing about China.
[Amit Varma]: Some of this is due to language, of course.
[Amit Varma]: We were colonized by the British.
[Amit Varma]: We turned English into an Indian language.
[Amit Varma]: So of course we would know more about America.
[Amit Varma]: Some of it is because America is a more open society.
[Amit Varma]: And this globalized world is actually an Americanized world.
[Amit Varma]: Those reasons explain a lot.
[Amit Varma]: But it is possible that China, our largest neighbor, could also be our biggest ally,
[Amit Varma]: just as they could also be our biggest threat.
[Amit Varma]: We really should know more about China.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Bhadwa.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: In my last two episodes, I focused on Pakistan, first on the electoral and political landscape
[Amit Varma]: in Pakistan, and then on how going nuclear changed our relationship with them.
[Amit Varma]: In this episode, I want to talk about China, in particular, Chinese foreign policy.
[Amit Varma]: How does China see itself vis-a-vis the rest of the world?
[Amit Varma]: What are its foreign policy objectives?
[Amit Varma]: How does it aim to achieve them?
[Amit Varma]: Should India be worried or hopeful?
[Amit Varma]: To discuss all this, I'll be speaking to Manoj Kevalramani, a fellow at the Takshashila Institution.
[Amit Varma]: Manoj is a China expert and writes Eye on China, a weekly column about developments
[Amit Varma]: in the Middle Kingdom.
[Amit Varma]: For the website, I add it pragati at thinkpragati.com.
[Amit Varma]: What's more, he's also going to be conducting an online course soon explaining China to
[Amit Varma]: laymen called Inside, She's China.
[Amit Varma]: This four-week course, which consists of a bunch of webinars and can be done remotely,
[Amit Varma]: begins on August 27th.
[Amit Varma]: To get more details of this course, head on over to takshashila.org.in slash special dash
[Amit Varma]: courses or just Google for it, Inside, She's China by Manoj Kevalramani.
[Amit Varma]: And now my conversation with him, but before that, a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: If this happens to be the only podcast you listen to, well, you need to listen to some
[Amit Varma]: more.
[Amit Varma]: Check out the ones from IVM Podcast who co-produced the show with me.
[Amit Varma]: Go to ivmpodcast.com or download the IVM app and you'll find a host of great Indian podcasts
[Amit Varma]: that cover every subject you could think of.
[Amit Varma]: From the magazine I edit, Pragati, at thinkpragati.com, there is the Pragati podcast hosted by Hamsini
[Amit Varma]: Hariharan and Pawan Srinath.
[Amit Varma]: There is a brilliant Hindi podcast, Puliyabazi, hosted by Pranay Koteswamy and Saurabh Chandra.
[Amit Varma]: And apart from these policy podcasts, IVM has shows that cover music, films, finance,
[Amit Varma]: sports, sci-fi, tech, and the LGBT community, all under one roof, or rather all in one app.
[Amit Varma]: So download the IVM podcast app today.
[Amit Varma]: Manoj, welcome to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Hi, thank you so much.
[Amit Varma]: Manoj, I got to warn you before we start our conversation that I'm a complete newbie about
[Amit Varma]: both China and about foreign policy.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, doing an episode on Chinese foreign policy will require a lot of patience
[Guest]: on your part.
[Guest]: No, I mean, that's wonderful for me because I can get away with a lot of errors, I guess
[Guest]: then.
[Amit Varma]: But no, I'm sure it'll be fun.
[Amit Varma]: The listeners of the scene in the unseen are very knowledgeable, they will find any errors.
[Amit Varma]: So let me kind of start off by asking you this.
[Amit Varma]: I'd done an episode on foreign policy in general, a few weeks ago with your colleague Nitin
[Amit Varma]: Pai.
[Amit Varma]: And Nitin pointed out the various different schools of foreign policy.
[Amit Varma]: And about China, what he said in particular was that the impression I got from that episode
[Amit Varma]: was that China has sort of had a very insular foreign policy where it doesn't look outward,
[Amit Varma]: it's kind of happy with what it is and just defending its borders and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: What has, is that correct?
[Amit Varma]: What has been the historical outlook of China towards the rest of the world?
[Guest]: And is that changing?
[Guest]: That's a good question.
[Guest]: I mean, I wouldn't characterize China's foreign policy outlook as insular.
[Guest]: I wouldn't do so at any point of time.
[Guest]: I mean, when you talk about China, what you really need to think of is that this is a
[Guest]: political entity which has been there for at least 2000 plus 2500 years.
[Guest]: And that's how the Chinese also view themselves as a civilization, obviously much older, 5000
[Guest]: odd years, but as a political unified entity from about 2000 years onwards.
[Guest]: And throughout that period, there have been periods of expansion, there have been periods
[Guest]: of being insular.
[Guest]: But the idea that China remains a serious actor internationally has been a core idea
[Guest]: within the political system, whether it was during the dynasties, or whether it is during
[Guest]: the People's Republic era.
[Guest]: So just a quick sense, I think, I presume one of the concepts that Nitin must have spoken
[Guest]: about was this concept of Tianxia, which is a Chinese term referring to a broader concept
[Guest]: of all under the heaven.
[Guest]: This is the fundamental concept which places, from which we derive the idea of the Middle
[Guest]: Kingdom.
[Guest]: So when you see a kingdom or a polity talking about itself as the center of the world as
[Guest]: the Middle Kingdom, you can't really see it as insular in that sense.
[Amit Varma]: That's where I derived that logic from.
[Amit Varma]: And what's traditionally been China's approach towards the world, like one of the things
[Amit Varma]: that you know, Nitin did speak about is how international relations really evolved during
[Amit Varma]: the 20th century with different nation states looking outwards and trying to establish a
[Amit Varma]: particular place for themselves in the world.
[Amit Varma]: How has that evolved from China, the way China sees itself vis-a-vis the rest of the world?
[Amit Varma]: And has ideology had an impact on that?
[Guest]: Okay, so I think this is great.
[Guest]: So this picks up on the point of the Middle Kingdom.
[Guest]: And then that's where I'll build further from.
[Guest]: So the idea of the Middle Kingdom is this central body through which everything emanates,
[Guest]: and civilization and culture emanates from it, commerce and trade emanates from it.
[Guest]: And it's the center of the world.
[Guest]: So in that sense, it sees itself or it saw itself as the center of the world, as a exceptional
[Guest]: state in this larger international space.
[Guest]: Now, if I was to fast forward that, to say 1949, from the fall of the Qing dynasty in
[Guest]: 1911, 1912 to 1949, that chaotic period in China, where you have colonization, you have
[Guest]: a civil war between nationalists and the communists, and you have the World War invasions by the
[Guest]: Japanese.
[Guest]: And China goes through this entire period of turmoil, where it's questioning its place
[Guest]: in the world.
[Guest]: And it's wondering where the idea of this Middle Kingdom has gone, where the glory of
[Guest]: the Middle Kingdom has gone.
[Guest]: And then in 1949, we have the People's Republic, which emerges.
[Guest]: And the People's Republic under Mao Zedong has an idea of itself as a revolutionary force.
[Guest]: So it sees its role in the international arena as a political entity that must promote revolution.
[Guest]: So this is obviously with the Soviet Union.
[Guest]: So China goes through that.
[Guest]: That's your first modern China, the People's Republic phase, where you establish the idea
[Guest]: that you want to be a revolutionary force.
[Guest]: And then by the late 1970s, after Mao Zedong's death and the arrival of Deng Xiaoping in
[Guest]: charge of China's affairs, you have a new architecture of foreign policy, which comes
[Guest]: out, which is not personality driven by Mao, which is not looking at revolution, which
[Guest]: is looking at China as a state within the community of states, and which is looking
[Guest]: at China as an actor in that arena.
[Guest]: And Deng Xiaoping goes on to develop this concept of Tao Guang Yang Hui, which essentially
[Guest]: roughly translates into hide your strength and bide your time, although the actual translation
[Guest]: is not that, but that's broadly what it's accepted to imply.
[Guest]: And what happens with that is that it's China now focusing on its own domestic growth, on
[Guest]: its economy, on its immediate interests, as opposed to this idea of a revolution, of a
[Guest]: global revolution.
[Guest]: And from that era, we come to today, which is a new era under Xi Jinping.
[Guest]: He defines it as a new era.
[Guest]: That's the phrase that he uses.
[Guest]: And the idea now is that China has come to a point where it can express itself internationally.
[Guest]: It can pursue broader interests, and it no longer needs to necessarily hide its strength
[Guest]: and bide its time.
[Amit Varma]: It actually needs to express itself more on the international stage.
[Amit Varma]: And what are these broader interests that under Xi Jinping, under this new era that
[Guest]: China is now exploring?
[Guest]: So I think these broader interests are that they build on the interests that have been
[Guest]: defined over the decades.
[Guest]: So one of the concepts that is very prevalent in Chinese foreign policy is the idea of core
[Guest]: interests.
[Guest]: As the name suggests, core interests, these are fundamental.
[Guest]: So these are the need to sustain development, economic development, the need to ensure territorial
[Guest]: integrity.
[Guest]: One must remember that China has territorial disputes in the east and the west, and even
[Guest]: somewhere in the north.
[Guest]: So it's important for the Chinese, therefore, to ensure the integrity of their nation.
[Guest]: That's how they see it as.
[Guest]: So the stability in Tibet, stability in Xinjiang, the border dispute with India, maritime disputes
[Guest]: in the South China Sea, the Senkakus and Diaoyu dispute in the East China Sea.
[Guest]: These are all factors that have built over a period of time as core interests.
[Guest]: So development, territorial integrity, broader economic security in which you're expanding
[Guest]: your enterprises.
[Guest]: They are going global and they are capturing market share, revenues, resources internationally
[Guest]: to ensure domestic development.
[Guest]: All of these are core interests which lead to a more fundamental core interest, if you
[Guest]: may, and that is the stability and the continuation of the rule of the Communist Party of China.
[Guest]: That is a predominant interest of the party, is for the system to survive.
[Guest]: So under Xi Jinping, he's built on that.
[Guest]: And you would see the idea of the Belt and Road.
[Guest]: You would see the idea of global governance reforms.
[Guest]: All of these being part of China's core interests, sort of accumulating within China's core interests,
[Guest]: because it's through these that China becomes a bigger actor internationally, and it also
[Guest]: secures itself.
[Guest]: So that's where I would define the broad set of interests that the Chinese have.
[Amit Varma]: So you sort of spoke about the focus then being on these three areas, that is, China
[Amit Varma]: continues developing, China looks after its territorial interests, whether it's in Tibet
[Amit Varma]: or the South China Sea or wherever, and also the third one being broader economic security.
[Amit Varma]: But one interesting thing you said, which sort of intrigued me is that, and I hope I
[Amit Varma]: understood it correctly, is that the reason for this is because Xi Jinping feels that
[Amit Varma]: the party has to continue structurally being the entity in charge in China.
[Amit Varma]: And the one thing that ensures that is if China itself is secure and stable within the
[Amit Varma]: world.
[Amit Varma]: So in that sense, all of these are a means to the end with the end being the continuation
[Amit Varma]: of the party in power.
[Amit Varma]: Did I understand it correctly?
[Guest]: Yeah, absolutely.
[Guest]: So if you read through Xi Jinping's speeches and government documents, what you will find
[Guest]: is that, and this was specifically noted by Xi in the 19th Party Congress, which is this
[Guest]: meeting that happens once every five years.
[Guest]: It elects a new Politburo, a new Politburo Standing Committee, which are your central
[Guest]: bodies that run the party, and also elects a new General Secretary every 10 years.
[Guest]: So Xi Jinping this year started his second term as the General Secretary of the Communist
[Guest]: Party.
[Guest]: So at this important meeting, which happened in October last year, Xi Jinping delivered
[Guest]: a very long speech.
[Guest]: It was, I think, about three and a half hours long.
[Guest]: And one of the central ideas of the speech was the concept that the party has to have
[Guest]: a say in every sphere of society in life.
[Guest]: The party must penetrate everything.
[Guest]: From there, Xi Jinping went on in March, where he became the president for the second time.
[Guest]: And again, at that meeting, he delivered a speech, which was mercifully just 30 odd minutes
[Guest]: long.
[Guest]: And in that speech, he reiterates these points.
[Guest]: And thereafter, there is a reorganization of government, where the party is further
[Guest]: merged with the government.
[Guest]: So this ensures that the party survives, the party begins to further cannibalize government
[Guest]: and state institutions.
[Guest]: And that's one of those fundamental goals, whether it's domestically or internationally,
[Guest]: the survival of the party is a precondition for anything else to happen.
[Amit Varma]: And this reminds me of the old slogan we had in India back in the good old days, I say
[Amit Varma]: ironically.
[Amit Varma]: India is Indira, Indira is India.
[Amit Varma]: And here it would seem there are sort of two relevant slogans, one, of course, being that
[Amit Varma]: China is the party, the party is China.
[Amit Varma]: And the other could even be that Xi is a party, the party is Xi, because in a sense, what
[Amit Varma]: Xi has also been trying to do, and again, correct me if I've misunderstood it, is consolidate
[Amit Varma]: his own hold of the party, even as the party consolidates its dominance over Chinese institutions.
[Amit Varma]: Is that correct?
[Guest]: No, that's absolutely correct.
[Guest]: And so much of Xi Jinping's first five years in power, I mean, he came into power in late
[Guest]: 2012, became the president in March 2013.
[Guest]: And what he's done is that he's structurally broken down networks of patronage in the name
[Guest]: of fighting corruption.
[Guest]: And he's also used that anti-corruption campaign to eliminate rivals, target rival factions,
[Guest]: streamline government processes, place confidence in key positions, and centralise the entire
[Guest]: decision making apparatus further.
[Guest]: Now, this might sound quite odd to a lot of people who generally look at China from the
[Guest]: news and view the Communist Party as this one uniform actor.
[Guest]: It's quite a divided actor in some ways.
[Guest]: And decision making can get paralysed at multiple levels.
[Guest]: And that's evident from the fact that Xi's had to look to centralise so much authority
[Guest]: in order to ensure that decisions are taken and executed.
[Guest]: So he's done that.
[Guest]: And that's resulted in this.
[Guest]: I mean, the culmination of all of this was the removal of presidential term limits in
[Guest]: March this year, where now Xi Jinping effectively can remain president for life if he wants
[Guest]: to.
[Guest]: So he has, yes, centralised the party, he's renamed, he's got his name entered in the
[Guest]: constitution of the country with his banner idea, which is Xi Jinping thought.
[Guest]: So that's now a part of the Communist Party and the Chinese state's constitution.
[Guest]: And that's a guiding vision now for the state.
[Guest]: So he's elevated himself to a position which is only, if not equal to, then probably secondary
[Guest]: to Mao, because it's very difficult to be equal to Mao.
[Guest]: But he's gotten himself to a position like that.
[Guest]: And so yeah, it has become that the party has become Xi Jinping's party.
[Guest]: The other idea that you spoke about, which was the party being China and China being
[Guest]: the party, I think the Communist Party would like for people to think that way.
[Guest]: But we must remember that the Communist Party of China has about 90 million members at the
[Guest]: max.
[Guest]: And China is a far more diverse, far more vibrant country in that sense.
[Guest]: There is a lot of different views and opinions that are expressed, and the party remains
[Guest]: this firm actor, which would like the image internationally to be that China is the party
[Guest]: and the party is China.
[Guest]: But China is far more diverse than that.
[Amit Varma]: But I mean, are there other actors on the political stage, for example, apart from the
[Amit Varma]: party?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, China's not a democracy, the party basically rules it, right?
[Guest]: Yes, it does.
[Guest]: It does rule it.
[Guest]: But when I say that China is very diverse, it's not necessarily in the context of formal
[Guest]: political activity.
[Guest]: Because yes, you have eight other political parties that operate within China.
[Guest]: They operate under the guiding hand of the Communist Party of China.
[Guest]: So they don't effectively have any autonomy.
[Guest]: They don't really contest elections.
[Guest]: Elections in China occur at certain levels, at the village level.
[Guest]: Those are experiments that are being conducted.
[Guest]: But predominantly, the political system is run through the party system.
[Guest]: So the party has a parallel system from center to provinces and further down to the state
[Guest]: system of central government, provincial government and further down.
[Guest]: And these two systems intermingle with each other.
[Guest]: So there isn't any room for other political actors to actually play any meaningful role.
[Guest]: But when I say that China is far more diverse, it's because not everybody necessarily, or
[Guest]: at least a large majority, don't necessarily recognize the party as necessarily this guiding
[Guest]: light, this force.
[Guest]: They see the party as an important actor, but they also see themselves as distinct from
[Guest]: the party.
[Guest]: A lot of people would like freedom of expression, a lot of people would like freedom of association.
[Guest]: And so therefore, I don't see necessarily this connect.
[Guest]: A lot of people would have a different perspective from the party in terms of how the politics
[Guest]: should be run.
[Guest]: But it's also about where your interest lies.
[Guest]: Can you actually append the order?
[Guest]: Does appending the orders serve your interests?
[Guest]: So there are multiple factors at play.
[Guest]: But as a society, if you visit China, what you realize is that there are multiple different
[Guest]: thoughts.
[Guest]: And the party's single ideological notions don't necessarily run through society.
[Guest]: It's not a society which has stopped thinking.
[Guest]: It's not North Korea.
[Amit Varma]: Right, so my sort of follow up question to that is, you had mentioned Xi's sort of formulation
[Amit Varma]: of quote unquote, a new era, which is the sort of outward looking foreign policy.
[Amit Varma]: Now, is that something that has come from Xi himself or was that part of a developing
[Amit Varma]: consensus within the party?
[Amit Varma]: And was it at some point inevitable that China would move in this direction?
[Guest]: Okay, that's a good question.
[Guest]: So a lot of this talk of the new era, okay, then the nomenclature for the new era comes
[Guest]: under Xi Jinping.
[Guest]: But you can see a shift that's happening in Chinese foreign policy from around 2008 onwards.
[Guest]: And this coincides with this financial crisis around the world, with the West struggling
[Guest]: with its banking system.
[Guest]: And you see, the Chinese essentially adopt a far more aggressive or assertive approach
[Guest]: in their foreign relations.
[Guest]: This manifests in the South China Sea.
[Guest]: This manifests in a remarkable conversation between a Chinese delegation and an American
[Guest]: delegation, where the Chinese delegation essentially tells the American delegation, responding
[Guest]: to the credit crisis that's developed in 2008, that there was a point where you were our
[Guest]: masters and you were our teachers.
[Guest]: I think the word was teachers.
[Guest]: Yeah, that you were our teachers when it came to the economy.
[Guest]: But today you failed, and we will have to find our own course, something to that effect.
[Guest]: So there's a departure that starts to take place from that point of time.
[Guest]: And that departure is witnessed in this assertion in the South China Sea, with regard to an
[Guest]: oil rig with Vietnam, with regard to the Scarborough Shoal, in the context of the China-Philippines
[Guest]: spat in the South China Sea.
[Guest]: In 2011-2012, we start seeing tensions with Japan in the East China Sea.
[Guest]: So you start to see this shift happening at that point of time.
[Guest]: And the perception is that there is an opportunity right now for us to express ourselves, because
[Guest]: there is serious turmoil around the world.
[Guest]: And you can see that America is on a decline.
[Guest]: And this credit crisis is precipitating that decline further.
[Guest]: So you see that sort of conversation happening within China.
[Guest]: And in that milieu is when Xi Jinping comes to power.
[Guest]: And so there are these two philosophical arguments that are happening when Xi Jinping comes to
[Guest]: power.
[Guest]: So there are these two philosophical concepts.
[Guest]: The first is the Deng Xiaoping concept of Tao Kuang Yang Hui, which I spoke about earlier.
[Guest]: And the second is this more assertive concept called Fen Fai You Wei.
[Guest]: Fen Fai You Wei essentially translates into striving for achievement.
[Guest]: That concept essentially implies that you need to actively shape the international or
[Guest]: the external environment to suit your interests.
[Guest]: So that implies a certain assertion in your foreign policy, as opposed to trying to keep
[Guest]: a low profile and taking advantage of scenarios as and when they arrive to serve your interests.
[Guest]: And so there is this sort of shift that begins to happen.
[Guest]: Under Xi Jinping, what we see is that we see this get crystallized into a clearer vision.
[Guest]: The idea of a new era, the idea of Belt and Road and China actively going global.
[Guest]: The idea that China is going to invite countries over and political parties over to Beijing
[Guest]: to shape a discourse on human rights, which is something that the West has dominated.
[Guest]: The idea that China wants to reshape governance norms, whether it's related to artificial
[Guest]: intelligence, whether it's related to human rights, whether it's related to lending.
[Guest]: So it's these sorts of things that start to happen.
[Guest]: So I would trace this sort of shift in foreign policy starting from about 2008 onwards.
[Guest]: And under Xi Jinping, it gets crystallized further, it becomes far more public, and China
[Guest]: becomes far more vocal about it.
[Guest]: So that's how I would categorize it.
[Amit Varma]: And what you described as this striving for achievement, how does it manifest itself?
[Amit Varma]: For example, how is Chinese foreign policy today?
[Amit Varma]: What are the salient ways in which it is different from Chinese foreign policy of say, 1995?
[Guest]: So okay, how is it different?
[Guest]: It's different, firstly, in terms of what is the narrative that is being projected.
[Guest]: So the narrative today that is being projected is one of China as an innovative, leading
[Guest]: world power, as opposed to the 1990s, and even through the 2000s, where the narrative
[Guest]: was essentially about China, a developing power, a developing state, which is eyeing
[Guest]: a peaceful rise or which is eyeing peaceful development.
[Guest]: So there is a narrative shift that happens.
[Guest]: If you look at that in the context of how China now looks at providing aid, providing
[Guest]: investments to countries, as opposed to wanting to be a recipient of aid and investment.
[Guest]: So those are sort of few tangible ways where this happens.
[Guest]: It also happens in the context of expanding military to military engagement.
[Guest]: China wants to sell weapons, it wants to sell its arms, it wants to build up this defense
[Guest]: industrial base.
[Guest]: So from projection to actual changes in these financial support to countries, investment,
[Guest]: arms sales, the essentially the opening up and going abroad and actually projecting the
[Guest]: power that you now have built up over time.
[Amit Varma]: That's the change that happens.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm going to want to drill down on that in some more detail, but let's take a quick
[Amit Varma]: commercial break first.
[Unknown]: So it's been another great week on IVM podcast, if you're not following us on social media,
[Unknown]: please do.
[Unknown]: We're IVM podcast on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram.
[Unknown]: Last week, we launched a new podcast called the kinetic living podcast with Urmi Kothari.
[Unknown]: It's a show about keeping fit both physically and mentally.
[Unknown]: Listen to our conversation with some of the most interesting people and how they went
[Unknown]: on their fitness journeys.
[Unknown]: On Cyrus Says this week, Cyrus speaks to Nihal Mariwala, co-founder of Setu India.
[Unknown]: They speak about health culture in this country.
[Unknown]: On Colaba Cartel, I'm joined by Gauri, Jai, Abhishek and Sumit who reveal how they came
[Unknown]: up with the concept for the new restaurant Misty.
[Unknown]: On Geekfruit this week, Tejas and Dinkar discuss all things in pop culture that are so bad,
[Unknown]: they're hilariously good.
[Unknown]: This week on Shunya One, Sheila Ditya speaks to Nitya Sharma from Simple.
[Unknown]: That's the sign you see every time you have to enter the OTP for your payments on the
[Unknown]: apps that you use.
[Unknown]: On the scene and the unseen, Amit Verma speaks to journalist and China expert Manoj K. Varumani
[Unknown]: to dissect China's foreign policy and its impact on India.
[Unknown]: And with that, let's continue with your show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene and the unseen, Manoj.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: So we were sort of talking about this fundamental change that, you know, happened between the
[Amit Varma]: era of Deng and the era of Xi, the era of Deng basically being hide your strengths and
[Amit Varma]: bide your time as, as you put it, which China was content to sort of focus on its own internal
[Amit Varma]: development and not worry so much about the rest of the world.
[Amit Varma]: And Xi's formulation, which, as you pointed out, is something that was happening anyway,
[Amit Varma]: and it's not necessarily dependent on his person, was that of a new era where China
[Amit Varma]: takes a much more active role in world affairs, where it tries to sort of sustain its development,
[Amit Varma]: be more aggressive about its territorial integrity, and search for broader economic security,
[Amit Varma]: and get more involved in the world, whether it's in terms of, you know, investing in other
[Amit Varma]: countries around the world, including Africa recently, as you wrote about, on Pragati,
[Amit Varma]: and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And all this is very interesting, because this is happening at a time where like you
[Amit Varma]: refer to the financial crisis of 2008, as sort of one of those points where something
[Amit Varma]: began to turn, or maybe when it became visible, where America sort of losing its grip as a
[Amit Varma]: sole superpower of the world.
[Amit Varma]: And especially now that, you know, Donald Trump has come on the scene, and he's starting
[Amit Varma]: these trade wars, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: So how has the US, like earlier, for example, the US was content to do its thing and the
[Amit Varma]: China was content to do its thing and sort of build itself while America did what it
[Amit Varma]: did and rule the world.
[Amit Varma]: And now it's almost like, would it be fair to say, number one, that it's bipolar and
[Amit Varma]: number two, that China is actively trying to be the one big player on the block?
[Guest]: I wouldn't categorize what's happening right now as bipolarity or a shift towards bipolarity.
[Guest]: I think a lot of Chinese analysts would like to believe that bipolarity is inevitable.
[Guest]: But I wouldn't categorize it as that right now.
[Guest]: What I would say is that what's more inevitable is what's more probable, what's more inevitable,
[Guest]: what's more probable is the idea of multipolarity with multiple power centers, whether it's
[Guest]: the US, whether it's India, China, Russia, the European Union, probably South Africa,
[Guest]: probably Brazil.
[Guest]: So you have multiple power centers that will emerge, each with their own capacity to project
[Guest]: power, whether it's economic, military power, hard power, soft power, economic.
[Guest]: So that's how I would see, that's the way I see the world go, that's direction in which
[Guest]: I see the world going in.
[Guest]: And that would lead to some interesting combinations among states.
[Guest]: But as far as this notion that there would be bipolarity in the Chinese, the party is
[Guest]: looking at this as an opportunity to somewhere replace the US as a leading global power eventually.
[Guest]: You will see literature coming out of China which argues that, and which argues that is
[Guest]: inevitable.
[Guest]: But my sense is that if you just look at capacities at the moment, you will see that the Chinese
[Guest]: don't necessarily have the hard power capacity to project power around the world, even in
[Guest]: their region, which is East Asia.
[Guest]: Their capacities are limited just by geography, just by US alliance systems.
[Guest]: So there's a lot that needs to change for some of this bipolarity or any of this to
[Guest]: come about.
[Guest]: That's how I would view it.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, one of the dissonances I've always felt between economics and geopolitics,
[Amit Varma]: and obviously, I know the former much better than I understand the latter, is that economics
[Amit Varma]: is fundamentally positive somewhere, you know, two parties interact, and both of them can
[Amit Varma]: benefit.
[Amit Varma]: And geopolitics often plays out like a zero sum game, where, you know, there's a lot of
[Amit Varma]: one upmanship, and there's a lot of zero sum thinking.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, with Trump becoming the president in the US, Trump is clearly a zero sum thinker.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, that's the reason he started these trade wars, because he foolishly assumes that
[Amit Varma]: a trade deficit is a bad thing.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, if there's a winner, there must be a loser.
[Amit Varma]: And if there's a trade deficit, the US must be a loser, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And that's, that's obviously very fundamentally flawed thinking, but we can say that, okay,
[Amit Varma]: Trump is an aberration.
[Amit Varma]: But how does the Chinese view it?
[Amit Varma]: Do they view it in positive some terms, in the sense that, look, we just need to expand
[Amit Varma]: our trade everywhere, and everybody's benefiting, and that's fine, as long as, you know, we
[Amit Varma]: are stronger, or do they also have a little bit of the zero sum sense where other people
[Amit Varma]: have to be outwitted, and they have to establish their dominance?
[Guest]: I think that the Chinese, if you look at the rhetoric, you will see the Chinese being very
[Guest]: critical of the idea of zero sum politics.
[Guest]: They will essentially repeatedly, if you look at Chinese diplomatic communication, they'll
[Guest]: be talking about the fact that zero sum thinking is Cold War mentality, and the world has moved
[Guest]: way past the Cold War.
[Guest]: And we need to get beyond this, we need to look at win-win diplomacy, we need to look
[Guest]: at building a community of common destiny for all of mankind.
[Guest]: All of this is fine rhetoric, but it doesn't necessarily translate into as idealistic a
[Guest]: vision of the world in terms of practice.
[Guest]: So in terms of practice, how the Chinese go about it is, fundamentally, my interests need
[Guest]: to be taken care of.
[Guest]: But yes, that does not necessarily mean that you need to be damaged, which is zero sum
[Guest]: mentality, which is what Trump is doing when he's saying that our relationship is a transaction,
[Guest]: I need to win every deal.
[Guest]: The Chinese view it as, can I serve my interests while also getting you something that you
[Guest]: want, which is their approach in Africa.
[Guest]: And just an example of that approach I'll give you, last week when Xi Jinping was in
[Guest]: Africa and when he visited Rwanda, there was a quote by the president of Rwanda, Paul Kagame,
[Guest]: where he talks about how China relates to Africa as an equal.
[Guest]: He says, we see ourselves as people on the road to prosperity.
[Guest]: China's actions demonstrate that you see us the same way.
[Guest]: This is a revolutionary posture in world affairs, and it is much more important, much more precious
[Guest]: than money.
[Guest]: So you can see that there is an approach with China, which is not necessarily zero sum.
[Guest]: It's willing to play the game, it's willing to bargain, it's willing to trade off, provided
[Guest]: that its core interests are met.
[Guest]: And that's something that America under Trump is not doing so well.
[Guest]: So that's how I would characterize China's approach, which is that I have a certain set
[Guest]: of core interests, any engagement needs to make sure that those core interests are met.
[Guest]: Within those boundaries, I can work with you.
[Amit Varma]: And that actually sounds eminently sensible.
[Amit Varma]: And so I'm going to ask you to sort of take a step back from description to prescription,
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that if you then have to look at China's foreign policy as an expert, what
[Amit Varma]: would you do differently?
[Amit Varma]: Is there any reason for the approach to be different?
[Amit Varma]: Or does this all make spectacularly good sense to you?
[Guest]: I think it makes really good sense.
[Guest]: I think the errors that the Chinese have made in the last few years have been this error
[Guest]: of assertion, this error of announcing themselves as a great power, as a big power, before they
[Guest]: actually have got the kind of capacity that you need to be a great or a big power.
[Guest]: And you can see that manifesting in how the Chinese are now looking at scaling down some
[Guest]: of their rhetoric about, oh, we are not that innovative, we are not that technologically
[Guest]: advanced.
[Guest]: So that rhetorical shift is what they are making.
[Guest]: Because this announcement of China being this great power, which is going to play this leading
[Guest]: role in world affairs, which is once again wants to take the center stage in world affairs,
[Guest]: leaves you open to a lot of criticism about your domestic economy being highly shielded,
[Guest]: about access to your markets, about the problems that your investments are creating in other
[Guest]: countries.
[Guest]: So I think rhetorically, those are the errors that they have made.
[Guest]: Practically, what they need to do is they need to look at their own.
[Guest]: If I was a Chinese analyst, if I was sitting in Beijing, what I would be advising the government
[Guest]: is that we need to fundamentally look at our debt issues, because our economy is perched
[Guest]: on a massive debt overhang, which we've been kicking this can down the road year after
[Guest]: year.
[Guest]: Sooner or later, it's something that's going to come to bite.
[Guest]: And this will damage us not just domestically, but also internationally.
[Guest]: What happens to you when all these pledges of belt and road investments that you've made
[Guest]: are no longer doable because you're struggling with debt at home?
[Guest]: It completely undermines the idea of China as this pillar on which a new sort of global
[Guest]: economy can be built.
[Guest]: So I'd somewhere pull back on the rhetoric.
[Guest]: And I'd also try and look at structural issues domestically.
[Guest]: The things that the Chinese have done right in the last few months or a year or so, is
[Guest]: that they've looked to soften their positions with regard to Japan, India.
[Guest]: And despite all the conflict and confrontation with the Australians over issues of sharp
[Guest]: power and Chinese influence in domestic Australian politics, they have shown overtures where
[Guest]: they would like the Australians to work with them.
[Guest]: So they've identified that there is a potential for countries to coalesce against us.
[Guest]: And that's, again, a product of their policies, tangible policies in the South China Sea,
[Guest]: but also a product of their rhetorical approach, which has been one of China has arrived and
[Guest]: China will do what it wants to do.
[Guest]: And so the scaling down of the rhetoric, the reaching out to Japan, reaching out to India,
[Guest]: reaching out to Australia, looking to work with multiple actors, even though there are
[Guest]: political shifts in different countries, say Malaysia, which has just had an election.
[Guest]: And the new leadership has blocked Chinese projects, but the Chinese haven't gone sour
[Guest]: on them.
[Guest]: They've in fact reached out to them.
[Guest]: The Chinese foreign minister was one of the first foreign ministers to travel and have
[Guest]: a conversation with the Malaysians.
[Guest]: And it's quite likely that Mahathir Mohamad, the prime minister, would be visiting Beijing
[Guest]: soon this month.
[Guest]: So you can see that the Chinese are looking at deeper engagement and softening their positions.
[Guest]: And I think the biggest sort of giveaway that this is going to happen more in the coming
[Guest]: future is in the end of June, there was a Central Foreign Affairs Work Conference held
[Guest]: in Beijing.
[Guest]: And Central Foreign Affairs Work Conference essentially is a conference where all the
[Guest]: senior most delegates of this party meet together and they debate, deliberate on foreign policy
[Guest]: and the agenda and how they should go about it.
[Guest]: And this is just the second time that such a conference has happened in Xi Jinping's
[Guest]: tenure so far.
[Guest]: And during this conference, they came up with a list of 10 points which characterize Xi
[Guest]: Jinping's thought on diplomacy.
[Guest]: And the point of core interest was number nine, which indicates that they want to downgrade
[Guest]: a certain, their assertion.
[Guest]: They want to make sure that this assertive attitude is not that significant going forward.
[Guest]: And what was on the top, what was among the priority list was this idea of working with
[Guest]: countries, creating a shared community of common destiny.
[Guest]: So all that signifies that you're going to be looking to reaching out to countries.
[Guest]: You want to build partnerships because things around you are changing quite dramatically,
[Guest]: largely owing to Trump.
[Guest]: And so this is, I think they've adopted the right path, but it's just about have you gone
[Guest]: too far?
[Guest]: If you let the cat out of the bag already, can you put the genie back in the bottle?
[Guest]: I think that's the balance that the Chinese government needs to strike right now.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm going to ask you about the implications in this for India.
[Amit Varma]: But before we go there, I was intrigued by the debt crisis that you mentioned and the
[Amit Varma]: fact that they need to do something about it.
[Amit Varma]: So give me a sense of what that debt crisis is, what is the worst case scenario in which
[Amit Varma]: it plays out?
[Amit Varma]: And what is it you would recommend that they do now to, you know, before things get worse?
[Guest]: OK, so I should preface this by saying that I'm not an economist and I know very little
[Guest]: about how economies function, but here's my broad sense.
[Guest]: So why did the Chinese accumulate all this debt?
[Guest]: They accumulated all this debt is because they wanted to invest heavily at a point of
[Guest]: time.
[Guest]: I'm going to go back to say about 2008 again, because again, that is one of those tipping
[Guest]: points where all this begins to happen.
[Guest]: So in 2008, once the world economy is going through this cash crunch, this liquidity crunch,
[Guest]: the People's Bank, the Chinese Central Bank, announces a massive stimulus package.
[Guest]: I can't remember the numbers, but it's hundreds of billions of dollars, a stimulus package
[Guest]: for the economy.
[Guest]: And they hope that by stimulating investment, then you can create growth.
[Guest]: And that's what they do.
[Guest]: You have more and more states and provinces and local governments undertaking massive
[Guest]: infrastructure projects because there is all this cash now available.
[Guest]: And all these infrastructure projects, you're not considering necessarily the economic viability
[Guest]: of these projects.
[Guest]: I mean, are they going to lead to any productivity gain?
[Guest]: You're investing because that looks good on your GDP because you're constructing.
[Guest]: And that's how growth continues for a significant amount of time.
[Guest]: Throughout that period of time, the Chinese government is talking about wanting to shift
[Guest]: from export and investment driven growth to consumption driven growth.
[Guest]: Now, we've got a domestic market, we need to stimulate consumption and investments are
[Guest]: being wasteful to a large degree.
[Guest]: So we need to curtail this wasteful investment.
[Guest]: So what starts to happen is that because the government at the center, somewhere it wants
[Guest]: to contain this investment, but it also needs to sustain growth.
[Guest]: So there is this push and pull which is going on, during which period of time, a lot of
[Guest]: local governments, a lot of companies are piling on massive amounts of debt.
[Guest]: Because at the end of the day, for a local mayor like me, if I'm the mayor of a city
[Guest]: like Tianjin, bureaucratically, my progression up the ladder in the Chinese system is dependent
[Guest]: on how I deliver on these material goals.
[Guest]: And if I'm supposed to meet 9% growth, 10% growth, I will take on the debt to meet that
[Guest]: growth.
[Guest]: And eventually those massive projects, whether it is a metro project or a massive park or
[Guest]: a massive housing system, that's going to be looked after by somebody else.
[Guest]: Because in a couple of years time, I'm going to move on to a different job.
[Guest]: So this is somebody else's problem who comes after me.
[Guest]: So that's how the system has piled on this massive amounts of debt largely.
[Guest]: At present, Xi Jinping has been talking about deleveraging for the last few years.
[Guest]: He wants, he realizes that there's a lot of unnecessary debt that's been picked up, whether
[Guest]: it's in infrastructure, whether it's in things called zombie companies, which are essentially
[Guest]: companies which are no longer profitable, but are propped up by state subsidies.
[Guest]: And he wants to curtail all of this.
[Guest]: He wants to rein in this level of debt.
[Guest]: But the problem is that the more you strip the cash flow in the economy, it's not just
[Guest]: going to slow down.
[Guest]: It's also going to lead to companies shutting down, job losses, and that's going to lead
[Guest]: to instability.
[Guest]: So how do you balance that push and pull between stability, growth, and wanting to have more
[Guest]: productive growth?
[Guest]: So that's broadly the nature of the beast at the moment.
[Amit Varma]: That's incredibly fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And it sounds to me very similar to how the US financial crisis happened in terms of it
[Amit Varma]: being enabled by easy money and bad incentives.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, moving on from the economics and back to the foreign policy, India's always
[Amit Varma]: had a sort of an iffy relationship with China.
[Amit Varma]: We've lost a war to them, we've kind of, you know, been wary of them, we have an ongoing
[Amit Varma]: border dispute with them.
[Amit Varma]: How does or how does China's new approach to its place in the world affect India?
[Guest]: You know, I want to answer this question with an anecdote to begin with.
[Guest]: So I spent five years living in the mainland.
[Guest]: And in those five years, anybody that I spoke to, whether it was from the media, or it was
[Guest]: from, you know, the ordinary sort of intelligentsia, the ordinary public, factory people, people
[Guest]: who are in manufacturing and across the sector, I found only a handful of people perhaps who
[Guest]: knew that there had been a war between India and China.
[Guest]: It's not something that they've, it's not something that survived in public memory.
[Guest]: And that's probably because the party has not wanted it to survive as much.
[Guest]: Today, obviously, things are different, and that's because of the Doklam standoff last
[Guest]: year, where you had Chinese media being extremely critical of India, you had a lot of racist
[Guest]: content, you had content which called out India, which put out editorials from 1962.
[Guest]: So the war essentially is now back in the memory, at least in public consciousness,
[Guest]: I presume people would know because I got a lot of messages from friends in China at
[Guest]: that point of time, saying that, oh, we didn't realize that this had happened, and that we
[Guest]: had a war in the past, and we hope that there's no more war in the future.
[Guest]: So that's just an aside, an anecdote, that a lot of people in India, I mean, in India,
[Guest]: the war with China is so deep in within our conscience.
[Guest]: But I don't think that's the same over there.
[Guest]: It doesn't resonate similarly, in terms of how China sees India today, and what China's
[Guest]: new position in the world implies for India.
[Guest]: So I think we can take what happened in Wuhan, as an example of China recognizing that India
[Guest]: is an important actor.
[Guest]: I think we've seen this for the last two years, when India boycotted the Belt and Road Forum
[Guest]: in 2016, you saw that when we boycotted the Belt and Road Forum, there was a lot of talk
[Guest]: about India being the only country which had not attended this forum.
[Guest]: And there was some degree of frustration from the Chinese point of view.
[Guest]: But there was repeated attempt to try and get India on board by talking about CPEC being
[Guest]: a development initiative, and China's position on Kashmir does not change, and so on and
[Guest]: so forth.
[Guest]: And thereafter, after the Doklam standoff, this accommodation by both parties, which
[Guest]: began at the meeting in Xiamen and BRICS in September last year, and then has further
[Guest]: gone on to Wuhan and thereafter, I think the Chinese see value in working with India.
[Guest]: They know that India is geographically well placed.
[Guest]: If Belt and Road in South Asia has to yield some degree of success, a measure of success
[Guest]: in India, you need to get India on board.
[Guest]: India is also a massive market for infrastructure investment, for Chinese companies to set up
[Guest]: manufacturing bases, there's lots that the Chinese can do in India.
[Guest]: And so I think that there is a sense that India can be a partner.
[Guest]: But along with that, there is also this suspicion that persists with regards to India's relationship
[Guest]: with the West.
[Guest]: Again, I don't think that the Chinese see the world necessarily as a zero-sum game,
[Guest]: but they are fundamentally cautious about the idea of India, the US, Australia, Japan,
[Guest]: this idea of these democracies coalescing together to contain China.
[Guest]: So they see India as a possible spoke in the US alliance network, the US alliance wheel,
[Guest]: and they see that as a possible occurrence.
[Guest]: So therefore, I feel that there is this sense of that we need to engage with India.
[Guest]: And Wuhan was that example where there was, it was not just the Indian side which wanted
[Guest]: to engage, but it was also the Chinese who wanted to engage and who saw merit in working
[Guest]: together.
[Guest]: So I feel that there is actually opportunities going forward.
[Amit Varma]: So can you explain Wuhan to me because I don't know much about what happened there.
[Guest]: Okay, so this was basically, it came as a bit of a surprise.
[Guest]: So Narendra Modi, after the Doklam standoff, Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Indian Prime
[Guest]: Minister, he traveled to Xiamen in September last year, which is a city in Southeast China.
[Guest]: He traveled over there for the BRICS summit.
[Guest]: At that summit, from what we understand, there was a, there was sort of a breaking of the
[Guest]: ice and Xi Jinping and Modi spoke and there was feelers put out of having a broader conversation
[Guest]: that led to more diplomatic activity with the Chinese foreign minister visiting New
[Guest]: Delhi in December and talks again, beginning on the boundary issue.
[Guest]: And that graduated in February this year, we had Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale go
[Guest]: to China and that set up again a framework of what sort of conversation we need to have.
[Guest]: And that essentially led to this meeting in Wuhan between Xi Jinping and Narendra Modi.
[Guest]: And the idea was that it's a two day summit, it's informal, it's unstructured, we're not
[Guest]: necessarily going to be talking about specific issues and identifying specific outcomes that
[Guest]: we need to come up with.
[Guest]: We're going to have this broad based conversation about what are your interests?
[Guest]: What are our interests?
[Guest]: How can we work together?
[Guest]: How can we prevent potential conflict like situations erupting?
[Guest]: Because last year at Doklam, we ended up in a position where there was a lot of talk of
[Guest]: war and there was a lot of jingoism, largely from the Chinese side, actually, the Indian
[Guest]: side was very restrained.
[Guest]: So Wuhan was this opportunity for these two leaders to sit down together and say, look,
[Guest]: there are dramatic changes happening in the world.
[Guest]: At the end of the day, we're neighbors, we're growing economies, we have converging interests,
[Guest]: and we need to engage, we can't end up in some of these binaries.
[Guest]: That's the broad narrative that's been put out by both sides.
[Guest]: And since then, we've seen deeper engagement between the two countries.
[Guest]: What I mean by deeper engagement is that they're going to resume bilateral military exercises
[Guest]: this year, India will be participating in the Shanghai Cooperation Organization's military
[Guest]: exercises along with China and Pakistan, India has been probably a little more restrained
[Guest]: in terms of its criticism of Belt and Road.
[Guest]: There are some analysts who would say that India has also scaled down its activity with
[Guest]: the quadrilateral group, which is the US, Australia, Japan and India.
[Guest]: I don't necessarily subscribe to that.
[Guest]: But yeah, you can see that in terms of public rhetoric, there has been a general shift in
[Guest]: India's position where we're not necessarily being that critical, while we are keeping
[Guest]: our fundamental oppositions to BRI, whether it be with related to CPEC or debt, still
[Guest]: out there.
[Guest]: But we're not necessarily going out proselytizing or telling people that this is a real problem.
[Guest]: So I think there's a broad understanding that's been arrived at between the two sides that
[Guest]: we need to maintain peace at the border, we need to look at our common interests, and
[Guest]: we need to work on them.
[Guest]: One of the tangible outcomes of that Wuhan meeting was this idea that India does not
[Guest]: need to look at China's engagement within South Asia with a lens of suspicion.
[Guest]: So the Chinese have proposed this model called India-China Plus or India-China X, under which
[Guest]: they want India and China to work together in a third country, carry out joint projects
[Guest]: in a third country.
[Guest]: And the first country that they've announced for this is Afghanistan.
[Guest]: It's still not clear what exactly this joint project will be.
[Guest]: But what we know as of now is that there will be a joint capacity building project.
[Guest]: We're not still clear on the details of when that will happen, what that project is going
[Guest]: to be.
[Guest]: But the idea is you've set about a framework of working together as opposed to looking
[Guest]: at each other's actions with suspicion.
[Amit Varma]: All of that is very heartening.
[Amit Varma]: But I want to go back to a phrase you used a little earlier when you spoke about China's
[Amit Varma]: attitude to China's position on Kashmir.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, there's also been the sense that China is sort of exploring deeper engagement
[Amit Varma]: with Pakistan and helping them in their conflict with us.
[Amit Varma]: Now, is that sort of a historical artifact of how the world used to be a while ago, or
[Guest]: are they hedging?
[Guest]: Okay, so that's a good question.
[Guest]: I would see the China-Pakistan relationship, yes, of course, it has implications for India,
[Guest]: but I would see it also as independent of India.
[Guest]: The China-Pakistan relationship is very deep.
[Guest]: It's deep political engagement, it's deep economic engagement, it's deep military engagement.
[Guest]: There is a strategic relationship between these two sides, and which at some level has
[Guest]: implications for India, serious implications for India, but it's also independent.
[Guest]: So CPEC is an example of how it's independent of India.
[Guest]: I personally don't see CPEC as something that is targeted at India.
[Guest]: The Chinese could have managed CPEC better, the routing particularly, and they could have
[Amit Varma]: managed to avoid some of these.
[Amit Varma]: Just expand on what CPEC is.
[Guest]: So CPEC is the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor, which is this massive corridor which begins
[Guest]: in Xinjiang in China, and goes all the way down to Gwadar in Pakistan.
[Guest]: This is going to be Chinese investments in building roads, bridges, rail networks, ports,
[Guest]: free trade zones.
[Guest]: So it's part of the broader Belt and Road Strategy.
[Guest]: As far as we know, the pledged investment is around $60 billion, and CPEC should be
[Guest]: completed, the time range for this is till 2030.
[Guest]: So it's over a period of 14-15 years is when the Chinese see this as being completed.
[Guest]: So the idea is to essentially support the Pakistanis in terms of building all this infrastructure
[Guest]: and facilities for them, and also gain, sort of deepen their own economic footprint within
[Guest]: Pakistan.
[Guest]: So the India component of this obviously comes from the fact that part of the CPEC route
[Guest]: runs through what is Pakistani-occupied Kashmir.
[Guest]: And so that's where India's objections primarily are that, well, this is impinging on our sovereignty
[Guest]: because all of Kashmir is an integral part of India.
[Guest]: And the Chinese say, well, look, don't look at this as a political issue, this is purely
[Guest]: a development project, which is, I mean, that's an argument that has weak legs to stand on.
[Guest]: I mean, the Chinese would not allow anybody else to build in an area that they claim as
[Guest]: theirs, but take it for what it is.
[Guest]: So that's what CPEC is.
[Guest]: So I would say the Pakistani-Chinese relationship is far broader because today, Pakistan, if
[Guest]: you look at Pakistani politics today in the state of the army, Pakistan's fracture of
[Guest]: its relationship with the US, China has become an important patron for the Pakistanis.
[Guest]: It's always been an important partner, but today it's become a patron.
[Guest]: So that's how I would classify that.
[Guest]: Now what deeper Chinese engagement with Pakistan does is that it also raises the stakes for
[Guest]: China to ensure stability in Pakistan and also stability between India and Pakistan.
[Guest]: So there's an interesting dynamic that comes into play where China now becomes an actor
[Guest]: that has legitimate interest in averting conflict between these two rival states in some way.
[Guest]: So to me, that's the concept, that's the idea that's interesting in all of this, is that
[Guest]: it raises China's stakes to ensure stability.
[Guest]: And if China does gain the kind of leverage that we imagine that it has, that Indians
[Guest]: imagine that it has, that China has deep say in Pakistan, it actually can motivate policy
[Guest]: in Pakistan, I doubt all of that.
[Guest]: But if the stakes get higher and the Chinese can develop levers and drivers to at least
[Guest]: shape policies in Pakistan, that can have massive implications for India and probably
[Guest]: even positive implications.
[Amit Varma]: No, and positive implications, exactly.
[Amit Varma]: Because just thinking aloud, you know, a couple of episodes back, your colleague Pranay Kotesane
[Amit Varma]: had done an episode with me on Pakistan, where he spoke about how there are basically two
[Amit Varma]: Pakistan's.
[Amit Varma]: One is the military jihadi complex, which rules Pakistan and the other is basically
[Amit Varma]: the putative state of Pakistan, or you could say, the people of Pakistan, the civil society
[Amit Varma]: of Pakistan and economic development of the kind that China is clearly hoping to enable
[Amit Varma]: there would strengthen civil society vis-a-vis the military jihadi complex.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, it would increase the incentives of the military jihadi complex
[Amit Varma]: to sort of keep Pakistan stable and not enter into a conflict with India.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, I mean, in that sense, a deepening Chinese involvement in Pakistan is something
[Amit Varma]: that could actually turn out pretty well for us contrary to rhetoric.
[Amit Varma]: I've taken a lot of your time, I want to end by asking you a dual question that I ask all
[Amit Varma]: my guests on whatever the subject of the expertise is, that what makes you hopeful?
[Amit Varma]: And what makes you anxious about China's new direction in foreign policy?
[Guest]: Okay, what makes me hopeful is the, that's a good question.
[Guest]: What makes me hopeful is the idea that there is a desire now, there has been reflection,
[Guest]: at least it appears so, that there has been some reflection and there has been a desire
[Guest]: to recast Chinese foreign policy as less aggressive.
[Guest]: And the pressures that have come with this trade war have meant that there has been a
[Guest]: certain degree of rethink and a certain degree of imperative to actually open up China further.
[Guest]: So there is hope that as China engages further, and as some of these pressures hit further,
[Guest]: China will act more responsibly, not just in terms of how it deals with conflicts, whether
[Guest]: it's on its periphery, or whether it's with regard to trade, or whether it's regard to
[Guest]: openness of markets.
[Guest]: So that is one thing that probably makes me hopeful is that if there is some degree of
[Guest]: rethink away from nationalistic rhetoric towards far more sane thought of how do we engage
[Guest]: far more pragmatic approach to what's happening in the world, that can actually lead to benefits
[Guest]: not just for China, but also for countries in the region, India, Japan, other Southeast
[Guest]: Asian countries.
[Guest]: What makes me fearful is Xi Jinping's centralization of power, his centralization of power, the
[Guest]: building of a personality cult around him, which is sort of like one can reminisce, one
[Guest]: does reminisce.
[Guest]: And if you read Chinese academics and authors who are writing today, who have dissenting
[Guest]: voices, and how some of these people are being silenced, there is a fear of China slipping
[Guest]: back into the chaos of the Cultural Revolution, we are still some way away from that.
[Guest]: But you're taking those first steps towards something like that.
[Guest]: And that's extremely dangerous, not just for people within China, but also for the broader
[Guest]: region.
[Guest]: Because China today is a driver of the global economy, and to see a state like that slip
[Guest]: into chaos has broader implications for people around the world.
[Amit Varma]: Manoj, the last one hour has been incredibly insightful.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for sharing your knowledge with us.
[Guest]: My pleasure.
[Guest]: This has been fun.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the show, do follow Manoj on Twitter at the China dude, all one
[Amit Varma]: word.
[Amit Varma]: Also consider signing up for his course, Inside Geeks China, which is an online course which
[Amit Varma]: runs for four weeks and starts on August 27, and consists of I think six webinars.
[Amit Varma]: And you can access the course by going to takshashila.org.in slash special dash courses.
[Amit Varma]: Also check out his column I on China which appears every Friday on the website I edit
[Amit Varma]: Pragati at ThinkPragati.com.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: And for past episodes of The Seen and the Unseen, hop on over to seenunseen.in.
[Unknown]: I'll see you in the next episode of The Seen and the Unseen.
[Unknown]: Take care.